Running the Adventure
This book contains a special preview version of some of
the material first presented in the D&D Essentials Kit
and is meant as a new group’s first Dungeons &
Dragons experience. The short adventure material,
characters, and other supplemental information here
should get a group started on their journey.
You’ll want someone from your group to be the
Dungeon Master. Photocopy the characters in the back of
the book, or head to dnd.wizards.com/charactersheets
to download them and make sure everyone has
access to the Basic Rules or a Player’s Handbook. You
can obtain the Basic Rules for free on the Wizards
website; check out the last page for more details.
Overview
A D&D adventure is a collection of locations, quests, and
challenges that inspires you to tell a story. The outcome
of that story is determined by the actions and decisions of
the adventurers—and, of course, the luck of the dice. You
can run this special preview of Dragon of Icespire Peak
for three to five players. Each player starts with a 1st-level
character, provided at the end of this adventure.
The adventure is set a short distance from the city of
Neverwinter in the Sword Coast region of the Forgotten
Realms setting. The Sword Coast is part of the North—a
vast realm of free settlements surrounded by lawless,
untamed wilderness. You don’t need to be a Forgotten
Realms expert to run the adventure, as everything you
need to know about the setting is contained in this book.
If this is your first time running a D&D adventure, read
the “Role of the Dungeon Master” section.
Role of the Dungeon Master
The Dungeon Master (also called “the DM”) has a special
role in the D&D game.
The DM is a referee. When it’s not clear what ought to
happen next, the DM decides how to apply the rules and
keep the story going.
The DM is a storyteller. The DM sets the pace of the
story and presents the various challenges and encounters
that the players must overcome. The DM is the players’
interface to the D&D world, as well as the one who reads
(and sometimes also writes) the adventure and describes
what happens in response to the characters’ actions.
The DM is a roleplayer. The DM plays the monsters
and villains in the adventure, choosing their actions and
rolling dice for their attacks. The DM also plays the parts
of all the other characters who the adventurers meet,
including helpful ones.
The most important thing to remember about being a
good DM is that the rules are a tool to help you and the
players have fun. The rules aren’t in charge. You’re the
DM—you’re in charge of the game.
2
Running the Adventure
CLAUDIO POZAS
MARK BEHM
Choosing a Dungeon Master
Who should be the DM for your gaming group? Whoever
wants to be! The person who has the most drive to pull a
group together and start up a game often ends up being
the DM by default, but that doesn’t have to be the case.
DM Tips
As the DM, you are the final authority when it comes to
rules questions or disputes during the game. Here are
some guidelines to help you arbitrate issues as they arise.
When in doubt, make it up. It’s better to keep the game
moving than to get bogged down in the rules.
Embrace the shared story. D&D is about telling a story
as a group, so let the players contribute to the outcome
through the words and deeds of their characters. If
some players are reluctant to speak up, remember to
ask them what their characters are doing.
It’s not a competition. The DM isn’t competing against
the player characters. Your job is to referee the rules,
run monsters, and keep the story moving.
Be consistent and fair. If you decide that a rule works a
certain way, make sure it works that way the next time
it comes into play. Treat the rules and your players in a
fair, impartial manner.
Modify the adventure to suit your tastes. The adventure
has no prescribed outcome. You can alter any
encounter to make it more interesting and fun for your
particular group of players.
Keep a notepad and some graph paper handy. Use the
notepad to keep track of details such as the characters’
marching order. Graph paper will be helpful if you need
to draw a quick map for your players.
Improvising Ability Checks
The adventure often tells you what ability checks
characters might try in a certain situation, and the
Difficulty Class (DC) of those checks. Sometimes
characters try things that the adventure can’t
possibly anticipate. You decide whether their attempts
are successful.
Ability checks only come into play if there’s a genuine
chance of succeeding or failing at the task. If it seems
like anyone should have an easy time doing it, don’t ask
for an ability check. Just tell the player what happens.
Conversely, if there’s no way anyone could accomplish
the task, just tell the player it doesn’t work.
If and when you decide that an ability check is required,
ask yourself these questions:
What Kind of Ability Check? Use the descriptions of
the ability scores and their associated skills in the
rulebook to help you decide what kind of ability
check to use.
How Hard Is It? Decide whether the task’s difficulty is
easy, moderate, or hard, and use the appropriate DC.
DC 10 (Easy). An easy task requires a minimal level of
competence or a modicum of luck to accomplish.
DC 15 (Moderate). A moderate task requires a higher
level of competence to accomplish. A character with
natural aptitude and specialized training can
accomplish a moderate task more often than not.
DC 20 (Hard). Hard tasks include things beyond the
capabilities of most people without aid or exceptional
ability. Even with aptitude and training, a character
needs some amount of luck—or a lot of specialized
training—to pull off a hard task.
Starting Quest
A white dragon has been seen in the area around the
town of Phandalin, a mining town in the Sword
Mountains. The Townmaster tells you, “A clan of
reclusive rock gnomes resides in a small network of
caves in the mountains to the southeast. The gnomes of
Gnomengarde are known for their magical inventions,
and they might have something with which to defeat the
dragon. Get whatever you can from them.” If you bring
back something useful and don’t want to keep it for
yourselves, the Townmaster will pay you 50 gp for it.
Adventure Map
The map that appears in this book is for the DM’s eyes only.
A map not only shows an adventure location in its entirety
but also shows secret doors, hidden traps, and other el-
ements the players aren’t meant to see—hence the need
for secrecy.
When the characters arrive at a location marked on a
map, you can either rely on a verbal description to give
them a clear mental picture of the location, or you can draw
what they see on a piece of graph paper, copying what’s
on your map while omitting details as appropriate. It’s
not important that your hand-drawn map perfectly match
what’s in the printed adventure. Focus on getting the shape
and dimensions correct, and leave the rest to the players’
imaginations.
3
Running the Adventure
Gnomengarde Gnomengarde
“Gnomengarde” is balanced for characters of 1st
level, though characters of 2nd level might find certain
traps and hazards challenging. Characters of 3rd level or
higher should be able to deal with the unexpected trouble
here and get what they need from the rock gnomes
without having to expend many resources, though the
roleplaying in this quest should be fun regardless.
Location Overview
The caves of Gnomengarde are carved into the base of
a mountain southeast of Phandalin, around a narrow
waterfall. The rock gnome wizards who occupy these
caves form strategic alliances with their human and
dwarf neighbors as needs warrant. Reclusive and
secretive, the gnomes craft minor magic items and
useful, nonmagical inventions to pass the time. In these
endeavors, their failures outnumber their successes.
They seldom stray far from home, subsisting largely
on the mushrooms that grow on misty islands outside
their caves.
Gnomengarde has two married kings who rule in
tandem—Gnerkli and Korboz. Korboz recently lost
his mind and is keeping Gnerkli as his prisoner. Their
subjects don’t understand the nature of Korboz’s
affliction, and are at a loss as to what to do. They wish
no harm to befall either king, but they acknowledge that
Korboz has become a danger to himself and others.
In addition to the danger posed by the troubled king,
two gnomes have mysteriously vanished within the
last tenday. No one except King Korboz knows that
a shapechanging monster (a mimic) has crept into
Gnomengarde and is feeding on the gnomes, changing
its appearance as it makes its way through the complex.
Korboz was attacked and almost killed by the creature,
with that event inspiring his madness. He has
sequestered himself and his beloved Gnerkli in their
quarters because he doesn’t want the monstrous
shapechanger to devour them. Korboz hopes the creature
will tire of eating gnomes and leave. Providing Korboz
with evidence of the mimic’s demise restores his senses.
Gnomengarde Features
Gnomengarde’s caves are hewn from solid rock and share
the following features.
Ceilings. Ceilings throughout are 7 feet high and flat.
Doors. Normal doors are made of wood fitted with rusty
iron handles and hinges. A locked door can be opened with
a successful DC 10 Dexterity check using thieves’ tools. A
locked door can be forced open as an action with a
successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. Secret doors
are made of stone and blend in with the surrounding
stonework. Finding a secret door requires a search of the
wall and a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Perception) check.
Light. All caves are illuminated by hanging oil lanterns
attached to rope-and-pulley mechanisms that make it easy
for the gnomes to lower the lanterns and refill them with oil.
Waterfall. The caves of Gnomengarde echo with the roar
of the nearby waterfall. The sound is so loud that gnomes
and visitors must shout to be heard unless there’s a closed
door between them and the waterfall.
4
Gnomengarde
Quest Goals
To complete the Gnomengarde Quest, the characters
must obtain at least one magic item from the gnomes.
Of the items they can secure, only the hat of wizardry
interests the Townmaster of Phandalin, who offers to buy
it for 50 gp even though he knows no one who can attune
to it. However, the gnomes won’t hand over any magic
items until the characters speak to Fibblestib and Dabble-
dob in area G11.
Gnome-Made Magic Items
If the characters rescue Gnerkli and end Korboz’s
break from reality, the grateful gnomes give them a
clockwork amulet and pole of collapsing (from area G13).
The characters also receive a gift from each king: a wand
of pyrotechnics from Gnerkli and a hat of wizardry from
Korboz. See the “Magic Items” section on page 15 for
descriptions of these items.
Arrival
A stream leads the characters to a pool fed by a waterfall
that tumbles down the mountainside. Describe
Gnomengarde’s location to the players as follows:
You follow a stream uphill to the base of the mountain,
where waterfall erosion has carved out a natural concavity.
The roaring waterfall creates a cloud of mist as it plunges
into a shallow pool of water, within which rise two small
islands covered with two-foot-tall red, green, and purple
mushrooms. Several cave openings overlook the pool
from rocky ledges twenty to thirty feet above. The
mountain blocks any sunlight from reaching this place.
Gnomengarde has five cave entrances perched atop
ledges with sheer, rocky slopes. Climbing to a cave
requires a successful DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check.
A narrow footpath ascends the northeast slope, making
it an easy climb to that cave entrance without a check.
Gnomengarde Roster
Twenty rock gnome recluses (see page 8 for their stat
block) dwell in Gnomengarde, including King Gnerkli
and King Korboz. The gnomes’ names and locations are
described in the “Gnomengarde Locations” section.
Mystery Monster
There used to be twenty-two gnomes living in the caves,
but a mimic (see page 8 for its stat block) devoured two
gnomes—named Orryn and Warryn—in the past tenday.
The creature is currently disguised as a barrel in area
G8, but it will devour more gnomes once its hunger
returns unless it is dealt with. It can move around and
adopt other disguises as needed, though its forms are
limited to Medium objects such as chairs, large chests,
lecterns, and weird gnomish inventions of the mimic’s
JASON A. ENGLE
size and mass. The mimic can also disguise itself as a
door, a false section of wall, or a rocky bulge on the floor.
After speaking to Korboz and learning about the
presence of a shapechanging monster, the characters’
primary goal should be to find and slay the creature.
When it attacked Korboz, it looked like a 10-foot-square
rug in the throne room (area G14), but it has since moved
elsewhere and changed its appearance.
If pressed, the rock gnomes help the characters find the
mimic by poking objects with nonmagical wands to see if
they fight back. The gnomes aren’t adventurers, however,
and they flee at the first sign of danger (real or imagined).
The mimic completely devours and dissolves its
victims, leaving no trace behind and relocating after each
kill. It won’t leave Gnomengarde of its own accord, as it’s
taken a liking to the taste of gnome flesh.
If you want a more interesting antagonist, make the
mimic one of the rare varieties that can carry on simple
conversations in Common. Characters who corner the
talking mimic can negotiate with it, and can compel it to
leave Gnomengarde with a successful DC 15 Charisma
(Intimidation or Persuasion) check.
Wild Magic
Wild magic is a kind of magic that can’t be controlled,
and Gnomengarde has long been a source of it. When a
creature anywhere on the Gnomengarde map expends
a spell slot to cast a spell of 1st level or higher, an
additional effect might occur. Roll a d20 and consult the
following table to determine the effect, if any. This wild
magic effect lasts for 1 hour, or until ended with a remove
curse spell or similar magic.
d20 Wild Magic Effect
1–6 None
7–10 The caster’s skin turns a vibrant shade of blue.
11–14 Tiny, insubstantial motes of light circle the caster,
shedding bright light in a 10-foot radius and dim light
for an additional 10 feet.
15–17 The caster sprouts wings like those of a butterfly. The
wings give the caster a flying speed of 30 feet.
18–19 The caster teleports up to 60 feet to a random
unoccupied space of the DM’s choice.
20 A whimsical effect of the DM’s invention.
Gnomengarde Locations
The following locations are keyed to the map of
Gnomengarde.
G1. Misty Pool and Mushroom Islands
The gnomes subsist on 2-foot-tall mushrooms that grow
atop two small islands in the middle of this 3-foot-deep
pool. The islands are perpetually shrouded in mist
from the waterfall. Magic bestowed upon the islands by
Gnomengarde’s first settlers causes the mushrooms to
grow to abnormally large size. This same magic is the
source of Gnomengarde’s wild magic (see above).
The mushrooms come in three colors. Red mushrooms
provide oil that the gnomes use to fuel their lanterns and
other mechanical devices. Green mushrooms are ground
into flour and used to make a tasty green bread. Purple
mushrooms are crushed and fermented to make
mushroom wine, which tastes as good as it sounds.
Gnomengarde
5
G2. Waterfall and Rope Bridge
The waterfall plunges 60 feet, its mist lightly obscuring a
35-foot-long rope bridge firmly anchored to 20-foot-high
ledges. The bridge is difficult terrain, and sags so that its
midpoint is only 15 feet above the water. A creature that
falls or jumps from the bridge takes no damage if it lands
in the water, which is 5 feet deep in the area below the
bridge. The bridge has AC 11, 30 hit points, and
immunity to poison and psychic damage. The barrel
crab contraptions in area G6 are too clumsy to cross the
bridge without getting tangled in its ropes.
G3. Dining Room
This room contains several dining tables and chairs
sized for Small folk. A stout wooden cabinet against the
east wall holds tin dishware and utensils.
G4. Kitchen
This kitchen is furnished with gnomes in mind, so
everything is either close to the floor or readily reachable
by tugging on an overly complicated rope-and-pulley
mechanism. Five rock gnome recluses (see page 8 for
their stat block) busy themselves here:
•
Joybell uses a poker to stoke the fire of a hot iron stove
standing against the east wall.
•
Dimble uses a complicated press-like contraption to
squeeze oil out of a big red mushroom and filter the
liquid into four oil flasks.
•
Panana stands atop a low table and uses a mechanical
rolling pin contraption to kneed green bread dough.
The severed caps of several big green mushrooms are
set around her.
•
Uppendown forms the dough into loaves of green
bread, his tongue sticking out as he carefully shapes
each loaf like a master sculptor.
•
Tervaround teeters on a stool as she stuffs a big purple
mushroom into a barrel, so that it can ferment and be
turned into mushroom wine.
Characters who question the gnomes are urged to
speak to Fibblestib or Dabbledob in the workshop (area
G11), as they know more about what’s going on than any
other gnomes in the complex. These gnomes won’t leave
the kitchen, but they can point characters in the right
direction. The gnomes avoid talking about the missing
gnomes or the unhinged King Korboz.
G5. Pantry
This room is piled high with small wooden crates. Each
contains loaves of green mushroom bread and other
foodstuffs collected and kept by the gnomes.
G6. Barrel Crabs
Parked in alcoves in this otherwise empty room are two
gnomish contraptions. Each resembles a crab with a
barrel for a shell, six articulated metal legs, and a pair of
forward-facing pincer claws. A hatch on the top of each
barrel opens to reveal an interior compartment equipped
with a small, leather-padded seat surrounded by levers,
pedals, and gears. The barrels are not airtight.
The gnomes built these crablike contraptions to grip
and move other objects, rather like crude forklifts.
However, the contraptions are so clumsy that they are
6
Gnomengarde
useless for delicate work. They are just small enough to
navigate Gnomengarde’s 5-foot-wide passageways.
Each barrel crab is a Large object with AC 15, 30 hit
points, a Strength score of 10, and immunity to poison
and psychic damage. It is designed to hold a single Small
humanoid, though a Medium humanoid can fit inside
with some discomfort. While in the barrel with the hatch
closed, a creature has total cover against attacks from
outside the contraption. It can use its action to make the
contraption scuttle across the ground at a walking speed
of 15 feet or make one attack with its pincer claws.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
target. Hit: 5 (2d4) piercing damage, and the target is
grappled (escape DC 10).
G7. Autoloading Crossbow Platform
Bolted to the floor of this room is a rotating platform
equipped with four heavy crossbows that reload
automatically. Each crossbow comes with twenty bolts.
Mounted above the crossbows at a height of 6 feet is a
chair equipped with pedals that causes the entire
contraption to spin counterclockwise, and with levers that
reload and fire the crossbows. This clanking, clattering
contraption is a Large object with AC 13, 45 hit points,
and immunity to poison and psychic damage. Every time
it loses 10 hit points, one of its crossbows breaks.
A creature sitting in the chair can use an action to
rotate the device up to 360 degrees counterclockwise
and fire up to two of its crossbows in any direction. Each
crossbow makes the following attack.
Heavy Crossbow. Ranged Weapon Attack: +5
to hit, range 50/200 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (1d10)
piercing damage.
Sitting in the chair when the characters first enter
this area is the device’s inventor, a rock gnome recluse
(see page 8) named Facktoré. When she sees strangers,
Facktoré decides to test out the contraption on them.
She stands down only when she or her contraption cease
to function, or when she can no longer see any targets.
Being deranged and utterly consumed by her work, she
can barely string together a cohesive sentence, let alone
advise visitors on where to go or whom to talk to.
G8. Mimic and Mushroom Wine
This room contains twelve forty-gallon barrels set into
wide alcoves. Each barrel is secured by a wooden brace.
The barrels in the south alcove have been tapped with
wooden spigots. Two of those barrels are half full, and
two are nearly empty.
Seven of the eight barrels in the north and east alcoves
are untapped and full of mushroom wine. The eighth
barrel is the mimic (see page 8 for its stat block). You can
decide where the mimic is, or roll a d8 to randomly
determine which barrel is the fake one. See “Mystery
Monster” (page 5) for more information on the mimic
and its behavior when discovered.
G9. Gnome Guard Post
Mist from the waterfall dampens this empty cave, which
has a 10-foot-high ledge overlooking it to the south. The
ledge can be reached by following the curved tunnel to
the east, or by scaling the slick rock wall with a
successful DC 12 Strength (Athletics) check.
Two rock gnome recluses (see page 8 for their stat
block) named Ulla and Pog stand on the ledge. When
anyone enters the cave, Ulla calls out, “Who goes there?”
in Gnomish, then Pog repeats the question in Common.
Their orders are to “attack shapechangers on sight.”
Since anyone might be a shapechanger, they attack
anyone who can’t prove they are who they claim to be.
Characters who don’t want to be attacked must succeed
on one of the following checks:
•
A DC 10 Charisma (Deception) check to trick the
gnomes into thinking the characters have an audience
with the kings of Gnomengarde.
•
A DC 10 Charisma (Intimidation) check to scare the
gnomes into thinking that any harm visited upon the
characters will result in Gnomengarde’s destruction.
•
A DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) check to
convince the gnomes that the characters can’t be
shapechangers, as shapechangers would surely take
less conspicuous forms.
G10. Spinning Blades
This area is lightly obscured by mist from the waterfall.
The larger eastern part of the room contains two
rapidly spinning devices that look like turnstiles fitted
with stacks of long, sharp blades spaced 1 foot apart.
The northern turnstile spins counterclockwise, while the
southern one spins clockwise. Any creature that enters
or starts its turn in the eastern part of the room while the
blades are spinning must make a DC 15 Dexterity saving
throw, taking 18 (4d8) slashing damage on a failed save,
or half as much damage on a successful one.
Set into the south wall of the smaller western part of
the room is a brass lever in the down position. Pulling the
lever up causes the turnstiles to stop spinning, allowing
safe passage through the chamber. The rock gnomes
bypass this trap by using the mage hand cantrip to move
the lever from the east doorway.
G11. Inventors’ Workshop
As the characters approach this area, they overhear an
argument in Gnomish between two rock gnome
recluses (see page 8 for their stat block) named
Fibblestib and Dabbledob. As Gnomengarde’s foremost
inventors, they are trying to dream up an invention that
will cure King Korboz’s madness. Fibblestib’s proposal
is a “sanity ray.” Dabbledob thinks that’s dumb, and
wants to build something called a “straitjacket” instead.
If the characters interrupt them, the gnomes realize that
the new arrivals might have another solution, so they fill
in what’s been happening and ask for any advice on how
they might help cure Korboz and rescue King Gnerkli.
Fibblestib and Dabbledob consider the mystery of
the vanishing gnomes of secondary importance to their
mission of aiding their kings. They focus on Korboz and
Gnerkli to the exclusion of all else, promising magical
rewards in exchange for aid (see “Gnome-Made Magic
Items,” page 5).
The workshop is cluttered with half-completed gnomish
inventions that serve no purpose, as well as worktables
strewn with tinker’s tools. A 10-foot-high ledge overlooks
the room, set with a wooden pedestal on which sits a
leather-bound book.
Treasure. The book on the pedestal is a spellbook that
the rock gnomes of Gnomengarde share. Its cover
describes its title as Magick of Gnomengarde (in
Common and Gnomish), and it contains the wizard spells
burning hands, detect magic, identify, mage armor, magic
missile, shield, and sleep.
G12. Gnome Domiciles
The floor of this cave is strewn with the remnants of old
campfires. Four side caves serve as sleeping areas, with
five small wooden cots crammed into each one. Eight
rock gnome recluses (see page 8 for their stat block)
sleep soundly here when the characters first arrive, with
two gnomes in each side cave—Caramip, Jabby, Nyx,
Quippy, Anverth, Delebean, Pallabar, and Zook.
Characters can move through the area without waking
the sleeping gnomes, who defend themselves if attacked
but pose no danger otherwise. They avoid talking about
the recent troubles, but advise visitors to speak with
Fibblestib and Dabbledob (see area G11), Gnomengarde’s
two most gifted rock gnome inventors.
G13. Treasury
The door to this room is locked, and Fibblestib and
Dabbledob (see area G11) carry the keys. The room
contains a jumble of nonfunctional gnomish gizmos,
as well as loose gears, twisted bits of metal, and other
scraps that the gnomes use to cobble together new
inventions.
Treasure. Amid the clutter, the characters can find a
clockwork amulet and a pole of collapsing, most easily by
scanning the room with a detect magic spell. It otherwise
takes 1 hour to find each item. See the “Magic Items”
section on page 15 for a description of these items.
G14. Throne Room
Situated atop a stone dais are two squat thrones made of
scrap metal and sized for gnomes. A secret door in the
north wall conceals a short tunnel leading to area G15.
Only the gnome kings know of this secret passage.
G15. Gnome Kings’ Bedroom
King Korboz has locked himself and King Gnerkli in
their bedroom, forgetting that there’s a secret door that
others could find and use to gain entry. Only Korboz and
Gnerkli have keys to the locked main door. If the
characters knock on the door or otherwise announce
their arrival, Korboz speaks to them from inside the
room and warns of a “shapechanger” in their midst.
Korboz doesn’t regain his senses until the characters
assure him that the monster has been found and killed.
Whether the mimic is truly killed or not, convincing
Korboz that it’s dead requires a successful DC 12
Charisma (Persuasion) check.
Korboz and Gnerkli are rock gnome recluses (see
page 8 for their stat block), each wearing a jagged metal
crown and a patchwork cloak. Gnerkli is glued to a chair
and restrained. Korboz carries a flask of solvent that
dissolves the glue on contact. Their room contains all the
trappings of a nicely appointed gnome bedroom.
Treasure. A small unlocked chest under the gnomes’
bed contains a hat of wizardry and a fully charged wand
of pyrotechnics. See the “Magic Items” section on page
15 for descriptions of these items.